Development Guide
=================

This document is a guide for developers who want to contribute to the project or understand its internal workings in more detail.

Environment setup
-----------------

Clone the repository
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: console

    git clone git@github.com:newton-physics/newton.git
    cd newton

Using uv
^^^^^^^^

`uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/>`_ is a Python package and project manager.

Install uv:

.. code-block:: console

    # On macOS and Linux.
    curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

    # On Windows.
    powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"

Run basic examples:

.. code-block:: console

    # An example with basic dependencies
    uv run newton/examples/example_quadruped.py

    # An example that requires extras
    uv run --all-extras newton/examples/example_humanoid.py

Updating all dependencies in the project `lockfile <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/layout/#the-lockfile>`__,
remember to commit ``uv.lock`` after running:

.. code-block:: console

    uv lock -U

Using venv
^^^^^^^^^^

These instructions are meant for users who wish to set up a development environment using `venv <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`__
or Conda (e.g. from `Miniforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>`__).

.. code-block:: console

    python -m venv .venv

    # On macOS and Linux.
    source .venv/bin/activate
    
    # On Windows (console).
    .venv\Scripts\activate.bat

    # On Windows (PowerShell).
    .venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

Installing dependencies including optional ones:

.. code-block:: console

    python -m pip install mujoco --pre -f https://py.mujoco.org/
    python -m pip install warp-lang --pre -U -f https://pypi.nvidia.com/warp-lang/
    python -m pip install git+https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco_warp.git@main
    python -m pip install -e .[dev]

Run basic examples:

.. code-block:: console

    # An example with basic dependencies
    python newton/examples/example_quadruped.py

    # An example that requires extras
    python newton/examples/example_humanoid.py

Running the tests
-----------------

The Newton test suite can be run with ``uv run -m newton.tests`` or ``python -m newton.tests``.
By default, the test suite execution will be parallelized on up to eight processes.
Pass the ``--help`` flag to see the available options for the test runner.

Some tests use optional dependencies like `usd-core <https://pypi.org/project/usd-core/>`__ and
will be skipped if they are not installed.

When using uv, the test suite can be run with all extras installed by running:

.. code-block:: console

    uv run --all-extras -m newton.tests

When using venv, the extras for the test suite can be installed by running ``python -m pip install -e .[dev]``
from the root of the repository.

A code coverage report requires installing ``coverage[toml]`` and can be generated by appending the
``--coverage --coverage-html`` flags to the test command, e.g.

.. code-block:: console

    uv run --all-extras -m newton.tests --coverage --coverage-html htmlcov

The file ``htmlcov/index.html`` can be opened with a web browser to view the coverage report.

Code formatting and linting
---------------------------

`Ruff <https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/>`_ is used for Python linting and code formatting.
`pre-commit <https://pre-commit.com/>`_ can be used to ensure that local code complies with Newton's checks.
From the top of the repository, run:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv installed
    uvx pre-commit run -a

    # With venv
    python -m pip install pre-commit
    pre-commit run -a

To automatically run pre-commit hooks with ``git commit``:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv installed
    uvx pre-commit install

    # With venv
    pre-commit install

The hooks can be uninstalled with ``pre-commit uninstall``.

Building the documentation
--------------------------

To build the documentation locally, ensure you have the documentation dependencies installed. If using `venv`, you can install them with:

.. code-block:: console

    python -m pip install -e .[docs]

Then, navigate to the ``docs`` directory and run:

.. code-block:: console

    make html

Alternatively, using `uv`:

.. code-block:: console

    python -m pip install -e .[docs]
    python -m sphinx -W -b html docs docs/_build/html

The built documentation will be available in ``docs/_build/html``.

Style Guide
-----------
- Follow PEP 8 for Python code.
- Use Google-style docstrings (compatible with Napoleon extension).
- Write clear, concise commit messages.
- Keep pull requests focused on a single feature or bug fix.

Roadmap and Future Work
-----------------------

(Placeholder for future roadmap and planned features)

- Advanced solver coupling
- More comprehensive sensor models
- Expanded robotics examples

See the [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/newton-physics/newton/discussions) for ongoing feature planning.

Contribution Guide
==================

Some ways to contribute to the development of Newton include:

* Reporting bugs and requesting new features on `GitHub <https://github.com/newton-physics/newton/issues>`__.
* Asking questions, sharing your work, or participating in discussion threads on
  `GitHub <https://github.com/newton-physics/newton/discussions>`__.
* Adding new examples to the Newton repository.
* Documentation improvements.
* Contributing bug fixes or new features.

Code contributions
------------------

Code contributions from the community are welcome.
Rather than requiring a formal Contributor License Agreement (CLA), we use the
`Developer Certificate of Origin <https://developercertificate.org/>`__ to
ensure contributors have the right to submit their contributions to this project.
Please ensure that all commits have a
`sign-off <https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit#Documentation/git-commit.txt--s>`__ 
added with an email address that matches the commit author
to agree to the DCO terms for each particular contribution.

The full text of the DCO is as follows:

.. code-block:: text

    Version 1.1

    Copyright (C) 2004, 2006 The Linux Foundation and its contributors.

    Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
    license document, but changing it is not allowed.


    Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

    By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

    (a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
        have the right to submit it under the open source license
        indicated in the file; or

    (b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
        of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
        license and I have the right under that license to submit that
        work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
        by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
        permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
        in the file; or

    (c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
        person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
        it.

    (d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
        are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
        personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
        maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
        this project or the open source license(s) involved.

Contributors are encouraged to first open an issue on GitHub to discuss proposed
feature contributions and gauge potential interest.
